.Dd 19 January, 2021
.Dt BPRINTF 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm bprintf
.Nd formatted output with named arguments
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Ar format
.Op Ar field Ns Cm = Ns Ar value ...
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
command is an advanced string formatting utility. It is a semantic
wrapper for
.Xr printf 1 .
.Nm
replaces argument order with named arguments and can perform arithmetic
within format specifications.
.Pp
A
.Ar format
string can contain a set of substitutions. A substitution consists
of a
.Ar field
name and an optional format specification. The format specification
determines how the field
.Ar value
is interpreted and displayed. A single
.Ar field
may be used within multiple substitutions, each with its own formatting.
.Ss Format Syntax
The
.Ar format
string is reproduced on
.Pa stdout
after performing substitutions.
.Pp
The backslash notation character escape sequences supported by
.Xr printf 1
can be used. The
.Sq %
character has no special meaning.
.Pp
A substitution is enclosed in curly braces. To print a literal opening
or closing curly brace escape it with a backslash, i.e.
.Ql \e{
and
.Ql \e}
respectively.
.Pp
A substitution consists of the field name and an optional format
specification:
.Dl Brq Ar field Ns Op Cm : Ns Ar specification
.Pp
A substitution without a
.Ar specification
behaves like a
.Sq %s
field in
.Xr printf 1 .
.Pp
The format specification consists of the same flags, Field Width,
Precision and Format characters described by
.Xr printf 1 .
If the format character is not supplied,
.Sq s
is implied. An arithmetic expression can be inserted into the format
by enclosing it in parenthesis.
.Ss Arithmetic Expressions
Arithmetic expressions support the same Values, Constants and Variables
as well as the same Unary, Binary and Conditional operators as described
in the
.Sx Arithmetic Expansion
section of
.Xr sh 1 .
.Pp
Note, this list does not include Assignment operators.
.Pp
All variables referred to within an expression must have a corresponding
field with an integral value assigned. Variables can be assigned
values with the same syntax as constants, i.e. an optional sign followed
by either a decimal value, hexadecimal value
starting with
.Sq 0x
or an octal value starting with
.Sq 0 .
.Ss Field Assignments
The
.Ar format
string may use all and any fields supplied by the subsequent
.Ar field Ns Cm = Ns Ar value
arguments. Fields not occurring in the format string are discarded
from the output. Values are arbitrary unless used within arithmetic
expressions.
.Pp
Field names must be made up of the pattern
.Ql [a-zA-Z][a-zA-Z0-9_]* .
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following is a list of all anticipated exit codes:
.Bl -tag -with indent
.It Er EOK=0
Command completed successfully.
.It Er ESIGNAL=1
Interrupted by signal.
.It Er EFAIL=2
Generic application logic error.
.It Er ENOARGS=3
No format string was supplied.
.It Er ESUB=4
A substitution field has no corresponding field assignment argument.
.It Er EID=5
A substitution field name is illegal.
.It Er EFORMAT=6
A substitution format specification is ill-formed.
.It Er EEXPR=7
An arithmetic expression is ill-formed.
.It Er EASSIGN=8
An arithmetic expression contains an assignment.
.It Er EARG=9
An argument uses an illegal field name.
.It Er ETYPE=10
A field value used in an arithmetic expression is not an integer.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Simple substitution:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ bprintf 'My name is {name}.\en' name=Johnny
My name is Johnny.
.Ed
.Pp
Using a field multiple times:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ bprintf '{str:.5}\en{str:.10}\en{str}\en' str=SugarHoneyMilk
Sugar
SugarHoney
SugarHoneyMilk
.Ed
.Pp
Use different field types:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ bprintf '{var:16} = {value:g} {unit}\en' var=g value=9.81 unit=mps^2
               g = 9.81 mps^2
.Ed
.Pp
Compute column width using arithmetic expressions:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$ bprintf '| {name:-16} | {val:(cols-36)} {unit:-12} |\en' cols=64 name=Name val=Value unit=Unit
| Name             |                        Value Unit         |
$ bprintf '| {name:-16} | {val:(cols-36).3f} {unit:-12} |\en' cols=64 name=g val=9.81 unit=mps^2
| g                |                        9.810 mps^2        |
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr printf 1 ,
.Xr sh 1
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
command was added with the
.Sy bsda2-0.4.0
release.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Dominic Fandrey Aq Mt freebsd@k4m1.org
