.Dd 3 December, 2019
.Dt BUILDFLAGS.AWK 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm buildflags.awk
.Nd convert
.Xr buildflags.conf 1
files into make syntax
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
script converts a
.Xr buildflags.conf 1
file into valid make syntax. The script can
normally be found under '%%DATADIR%%/buildflags.awk'.
.Pp
This is not end user documentation, if you just want to use buildflags.conf
files please refer to the
.Xr buildflags.conf 1
manual page.
.Sh SYNTAX
While the
.Xr buildflags.conf 1
man page describes how to use the buildflags.conf syntax, this page
describes the resulting make syntax. Syntax examples will always be followed
by the resulting make code. The term space actually refers to all whitespace 
characters (including tabs).
.Ss COMMENTS
Unless they're enclosed by '"' comments have the highest priority in the
buildflags.conf syntax.
Comments that are found behind valid code will end up one line before it.
.Pp
EXAMPLE
.Bd -literal -offset indent
%%PORTS%%/audio/arts	{IGNORE} # I do not want this, ever!
.Ed
.Pp
RESULT
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# I do not want this, ever!
\&.if ${.CURDIR:M%%PORTS%%/audio/arts}
IGNORE=                 yes
\&.endif # %%PORTS%%/audio/arts
.Ed
.Ss DIRECTIVES
Apart from being put behind trailing comments native
.Xr make 1
directives remain
entirely unchanged. Native directives are everything that begins with a '.'.
.Pp
EXAMPLE
.Bd -literal -offset indent
%%PORTS%%/* {
	.if defined(WANT_I386)
		CFLAGS+=	-m32
		LDCONFIG+=	-32
	.endif
}
.Ed
.Pp
RESULT
.Bd -literal -offset indent
\&.if ${CURDIR:M%%PORTS%%/*}
\&.if defined(WANT_I386)
CFLAGS+=	-m32
LDCONFIG+=	-32
\&.endif
\&.endif # %%PORTS%%/*
.Ed
.Ss QUOTES
Unless part of a comment quotes always have to follow a variable assignment.
Whatever lies within them will remain untouched, but there are no escape
sequences, thus there is no way to enclose a '"' within quotes. Only double
quotes have meaning, single quotes do not have a special function.
.Pp
EXAMPLE
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# " in a comment does not matter.
BUT= "	in an
	assignment
	does"
CFLAGS="-O2 -pipe" # We want optimized binaries!
.Ed
.Pp
RESULT
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# " in a comment does not matter.
BUT= "	in an
	assignment
	does"
# We want optimized binaries!
CFLAGS="-O2 -pipe"
.Ed
.Ss LOCATIONS
Locations are paths that are used to define where a variable assignment is
valid, this is achieved by make. This script will simply convert such location
blocks to a make '.if' statement. If possible symlinked paths will be
substituted with their physical paths. A '!' at the beginning of a path means
that is should not be matched. Several paths can be appended with '&'
(logical and) and '|' (logical or).
.Pp
After the location a block is opened by the character '{' and closed by
the character '}'.
.Pp
EXAMPLE
.Bd -literal -offset indent
%%PORTS%%/* & !*/work/*{
	*/x11*	{IGNORE}
}
.Ed
.Pp
RESULT
.Bd -literal -offset indent
\&.if ${.CURDIR:M%%PORTS%%/*} && !${.CURDIR:M*/work/*}
\&.if ${.CURDIR:M*/x11*}
IGNORE=                 yes
\&.endif # */x11*
\&.endif # %%PORTS%%/* & !*/work/*
.Ed
.Ss VARIABLES
For
.Nm
there are two kinds of variable assignments. Compact variable assignments
and long variable assignments. Variable assignments within quotes are
directly dealt with by the quoting code.
.Pp
Compact variable assignments are directly followed by their value, without
any spaces behind the '=' and their value ends with the first space or line
break. This makes it possible to have several such assignments in a single
line. Any such assignment will be parsed into its own line, though.
.Pp
Long variable assignments are followed by spaces and the only way to end
them without a line break is a '}'.
.Pp
EXAMPLE
.Bd -literal -offset indent
THREADS=4
CPUTYPE?=p3 CFLAGS= -O2 -pipe
/usr/src{CPUTYPE=i686 CFLAGS= -O -pipe}
.Ed
.Pp
RESULT
.Bd -literal -offset indent
THREADS=4
CPUTYPE?=p3
CFLAGS= -O2 -pipe
\&.if ${.CURDIR:M/usr/src}
CPUTYPE=i686
CFLAGS= -O -pipe
\&.endif # /usr/src
.Ed
.Ss FLAGS
There are two kinds of flags, negated flags and regular flags.
.Pp
Regular flags are variable assignments assuming that the mostly used assignment
simply is 'yes'. To define a flag it is enough to put the flag name in an
appropriate place.
.Pp
Negated flags are a way to undefine variables. To do so simply precede a
flag name with '!'.
.Pp
EXAMPLE
.Bd -literal -offset indent
!THREADS WITHOUT_BDB
.Ed
.Pp
RESULT
.Bd -literal -offset indent
\&.undef THREADS
WITHOUT_BDB=            yes
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr buildflags.conf 1 ,
.Xr buildflags.mk 1
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
script first appeared in the bsdadminscripts-2.1 collection.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Dominic Fandrey Aq Mt kamikaze@bsdforen.de
