.Dd 23 February, 2021
.Dt BUILDFLAGS.MK 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm buildflags.mk
.Nd import
.Xr buildflags.conf 1
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The primary function of the
.Nm
script is to use the
.Xr buildflags.conf 1
file, but it also offers knobs to easily use tools such as distcc and ccache.
.Pp
The intended way to use it is to add the following lines to
.Xr make.conf 5 .
.Bd -literal -offset indent
\&.sinclude "%%DATADIR%%/buildflags.mk"
.Ed
.Pp
.Sh OPTIONS
The following options to control the internals of
.Nm
are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It BUILDFLAGS_CCACHE
The ccache binary.
.Pp
Default:
.Pa %%PREFIX%%/bin/ccache
.It BUILDFLAGS_CONF
The configuration file.
.Pp
Default:
.Pa %%PREFIX%%/etc/buildflags.conf
.It BUILDFLAGS_DISTCC
The distcc binary.
.Pp
Default:
.Pa %%PREFIX%%/bin/distcc
.It BUILDFLAGS_PARSER
The program that parses the configuration file.
.Pp
Default:
.Pa %%DATADIR%%/buildflags.awk
.It BUILDFLAGS_TMP
A temporary file required to include the parsed configuration.
.Pp
Default:
.Pa %%TMP%%/buildflags.tmp.mk.${USER}
.El
.Pp
The following additional knobs are offered to manipulate make jobs:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It SUBTHREADS
WARNING: This setting is deprecated in favour of the ports native settings
.Dv FORCE_MAKE_JOBS
and
.Dv MAKE_JOBS_NUMBER.
.Pp
This knob does for ports what
.Dv THREADS
does everywhere else. It does not
have an effect if the target install is specified. Thus it is recommended to
run
.Ic make build
and
.Ic make install
seperately.
.It THREADS
This knob causes make to create parallel jobs. A sensible value is
twice the number of CPU cores available. This increases the
amount of memory used. If the system starts to swap often, the number should
be decreased to the number of available CPU cores.
Do not use
.Dv THREADS
with the ports system.
.It USE_DISTCC
Prepends the distcc binary to
.Dv CC , CXX
and
.Dv CPP .
.It USE_CCACHE
Prepends the ccache binary to
.Dv CC , CXX
and
.Dv CPP .
.It WITH_GCC
Triggers the use of the alternative gcc defined with
.Dv BUILDFLAGS_GCC .
If
.Dv BUILDFLAGS_GCC
has not been definied it will be set to whatever
.Dv WITH_GCC
was set.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr buildflags.awk 1 ,
.Xr buildflags.conf 1
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
script first appeared in the bsdadminscripts-2.0 collection.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Dominic Fandrey Aq Mt freebsd@k4m1.org
