.Dd 3 December, 2019
.Dt DISTVIPER 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm distviper
.Nd wipe outdated files from the FreeBSD ports distdir
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl dhinqv
.Op Ar keep
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
script removes outdated files within
.Li DISTDIR
of the
.Xr ports 7 .
To achieve this it reads distinfo files from the
.Li PORTSDIR
and creates a list of files to keep if they should be encountered.
.Ss ARGUMENTS
The following argument types can be given.
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ar keep
Chooses which kind of files are kept:
.Bl -tag -nested -width indent -compact
.It Li all , Li thorough
Keep files required for any port in the ports tree. The
.Ar thorough
alias exists for compatibility with the original bsdadminscripts.
.It Li installed
Keep files required for any currently installed port.
.It Li fast
This is the same as calling
.Nm
with the
.Fl n
flag and the
.Ar installed
argument. It exists for compatibility with the original bsdadminscripts.
.El
.El
.Ss OPTIONS
The following options are supported:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl d -demo
The program is run in demo mode. The program acts as if it would operate
normally, but does not remove any files.
.It Fl h -help
Displays the available options.
.It Fl i -interactvie
This option prompts for confirmation before deleting a file.
It is ignored in demo mode.
.It Fl n -no-checksum
Turn off checksum validation for files to keep. Much faster, but also
risks leaving invalid files in
.Li DISTDIR .
.It Fl q -quiet
Supresses all output except for interactive prompts.
.It Fl v -verbose
Makes the script talkative about what is currently going on.
.It Ar keep
There are currently two modes available. By default the thorough mode is
selected, which scans all distinfo files. The fast mode only scans distinfo
files for installed ports.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables are supported:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ev PORTSDIR
The location of the ports tree, e.g.
.Pa /usr/ports .
.It Ev DISTDIR
The location of the distribution files, e.g.
.Pa /usr/ports/distfiles .
.El
.Pp
The variables are collected running:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
make -f/usr/share/mk/bsd.port.mk -VPORTSDIR -VDISTDIR
.Ed
.Sh EXAMPLES
Delete any distfile not referenced by the current ports tree:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
distviper
.Ed
.Pp
The demo mode can be used to check which files would be removed:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
distviper -d
.Ed
.Pp
Avoid expensive operations, i.e. only keep files for installed ports
and do not perform checksum validation:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
distviper fast
.Ed
.Pp
Only keep files for installed ports, and ask for confirmation:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
distviper -i installed
.Ed
.Pp
.Sh EXIT CODES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It 1
An unknown parameter has been supplied.
.It 2
An unknown mode command has been supplied.
.It 3
More than one mode commands have been supplied.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr ports 7
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
script first appeared in the bsdadminscripts-5.0 collection. It was rewritten
for the bsda2 collection.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Dominic Fandrey Aq Mt kamikaze@bsdforen.de
