.Dd 13 June, 2025
.Dt LOADERUPDATE 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm loaderupdate
.Nd update boot loaders
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl d Ar destdir
.Op Fl L Ar efilabel
.Op Fl B Bro Cm ufs , zfs Brc
.Op Fl b Ar bootloader
.Op Fl e Ar efiloader
.Op Fl o Ar efifile
.Op Fl p Ar pmbr
.Op Fl cDfnq
.Ar device ...
.Nm
.Op Fl d Ar destdir
.Op Fl L Ar efilabel
.Op Fl B Bro Cm ufs , zfs Brc
.Op Fl b Ar bootloader
.Op Fl e Ar efiloader
.Op Fl o Ar efifile
.Op Fl p Ar pmbr
.Op Fl cDfnq
.Fl a
.Nm
.Op Fl d Ar destdir
.Op Fl L Ar efilabel
.Op Fl B Bro Cm ufs , zfs Brc
.Op Fl b Ar bootloader
.Op Fl e Ar efiloader
.Op Fl o Ar efifile
.Op Fl p Ar pmbr
.Op Fl cDfnq
.Fl P
.Op Fl a | Ar device ...
.Nm
.Fl h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
script updates the boot loaders of a given set of bootable devices
according to a given boot environment.
.Pp
The boot environment must contain a system kernel under
.Pa /boot/kernel/kernel
as well as the required loader images. The defaults of which can
be overridden by the
.Fl b , e
and
.Fl p
parameters. Which boot loaders are used by default also depends on
the file system of the boot environment.
.Pp
The default boot environment
.Pa /
can be overridden by providing the path to the current mountpoint
of a different boot environment via the
.Ev DESTDIR
environment variable, or the
.Fl d
parameter.
.Pp
The
.Sx BOOTSTRAPPING
section of
.Xr gpart 8
provides a good overview of the boot process.
.Pp
By default the loader update is performed if there is a checksum
mismatch between the respective loader image and the loader on disk.
The
.Fl f
option can be used to force the loader update.
.Ss Arguments
The following argument types can be given:
.Bl -tag -with indent
.It Ar destdir
The path of the mountpoint for the boot environment containing the
kernel and boot loader images. The default boot environment is
.Pa / .
.It Ar efifile
Formatting string for the
.Nm EFI
file destination, defaults to:
.Dl Dq /efi/{ostype}/boot{arch}.efi
.Pp
The following substitutions are available:
.Bl -tag -offset indent -width 12m -compact
.It Brq Ar arch
The kernel architecture
.It Brq Ar efiarch
The architecture as used by
.Nm EFI
default paths (e.g. X64)
.It Brq Ar ostype
The OS type (FreeBSD or derived)
.El
.Pp
Supports the formatting style described by
.Xr bprintf 1 .
.It Ar efilabel
Formatting string for
.Nm EFI
boot manager entry labels, defaults to:
.Dl Dq {version} {arch} [{pdev}]
.Pp
The following substitutions are available:
.Bl -tag -offset indent -width 12m -compact
.It Brq Ar dev
The device containing the partition
.It Brq Ar pdev
The device of the efi partition
.It Brq Ar index
The index of the efi partition
.It Brq Ar version
The kernel version
.It Brq Ar arch
The kernel architecture
.It Brq Ar efiarch
The architecture as used by
.Nm EFI
default paths (e.g. X64)
.It Brq Ar ostype
The OS type (FreeBSD or derived)
.El
.Pp
Supports the formatting style described by
.Xr bprintf 1 .
.It Ar bootloader
The boot loader image to use for
.Nm freebsd-boot
partitions. The default is either
.Pa /boot/gptboot
or
.Pa /boot/gptzfsboot ,
depending on the file system containing the boot environment.
.It Ar efiloader
The boot loader image to use for
.Nm EFI
partitions, the default is
.Pa /boot/loader.efi ,
the
.Nm EFI
variant of
.Xr loader 8 .
.It Ar pmbr
The protective MBR image installed in front of the GUID Partition
Table. The protective MBR chain-boots the
.Nm freebsd-boot
partition on systems booting in legacy BIOS mode. This is only installed
if a
.Nm freebsd-boot
partition is present. The default protective MBR image is
.Pa /boot/pmbr .
.It Ar device
The hard disk device to update.
.El
.Ss Options
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl a , -all
Selects all available devices.
.It Fl B Bro Cm ufs , zfs Brc , Fl -bootfs Bro Cm ufs , zfs Brc
Override the boot file system detection.
.Pp
Providing
.Fl B Cm ufs
or
.Fl B Cm zfs
is equivalent to providing
.Fl b Cm /boot/gptboot
or
.Fl b Cm /boot/gptzfsboot .
.It Fl b Ar bootloader , Fl -bootloader Ar bootloader
Override the default
.Nm freebsd-boot
loader image.
.It Fl c , -compat
Override the
.Nm EFI
loader destination inside the
.Nm EFI
partition with the
.Xr uefi 8
default location
.Pa /EFI/BOOT/BOOT{efiarch}.EFI .
.Pp
This provides compatibility with systems that ignore or forget boot
entries made with
.Xr efibootmgr 8 ,
such as virtual machines that do not persist the
.Nm EFI
boot configuration.
.Pp
.Sy Warning ,
not all
.Xr uefi 8
implementations support these default locations, use
.Fl o
to supply a proprietary location.
.It Fl D , -dry-run
Instead of updating the boot loaders just show the commands that
would be run. In combination with
.Fl q
this does not print anything apart from errors, which is useful to
run all checks performed by
.Nm
without committing any changes.
.It Fl d Ar destdir , Fl -destdir Ar destdir
Override the default boot environment.
.It Fl e Ar efiloader , Fl -efiloader Ar efiloader
Override the default
.Nm EFI
loader image.
.It Fl f, Fl -force
Force update of loaders that are already up to date.
.It Fl L Ar efilabel , Fl -label Ar efilabel
Set a custom label for
.Nm EFI
boot manager entries.
.It Fl n , -noefi
Do not create
.Nm EFI
boot manager entries via the
.Xr efibootmgr 8
command. This is useful when preparing a disk for another system.
.It Fl o Ar efifile , Fl -efifile Ar efifile
Override the
.Nm EFI
loader destination inside the
.Nm EFI
partition with
.Ar efifile .
.Pp
This can be used on systems that neither persist the
.Nm EFI
boot configuration nor support the
.Xr uefi 8
default locations available via
.Fl c .
.It Fl P , -dump
Instead of performing boot loader updates print a summary of the boot
environment and selected devices.
.It Fl p Ar pmbr , Fl -pmbr Ar pmbr
Override the default protective MBR image.
.It Fl q , -quiet
Do not print the commands that are run. This flag does not suppress
the output from those commands.
.El
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -with indent
.It Ev DESTDIR
Overrides the default boot environment.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -with indent
.It Pa /boot/kernel/kernel
Used to determine the version, architecture and OS to boot by extracting
the
.Va version , machine
and
.Va ostype
symbols from the kernel binary.
.It Pa /boot/gptboot
The
.Nm freebsd-boot
partition image for booting from
.Nm UFS ,
see
.Xr gptboot 8 .
.It Pa /boot/gptzfsboot
The
.Nm freebsd-boot
partition image for booting from
.Nm ZFS ,
see
.Xr gptboot 8 .
.It Pa /boot/loader.efi
The default
.Nm EFI
variant of
.Xr loader 8 .
Capable of booting from
.Nm UFS
and
.Nm ZFS ,
alternatives include
.Pa /boot/loader_4th.efi , /boot/loader_lua.efi
and
.Pa /boot/loader_simp.efi .
.It Pa /boot/pmbr
The default protective MBR image.
.It Pa /usr/include/sys/disk/mbr.h
Required to locate the protective MBR inside a block device for
checksum verification.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
The following is a list of all anticipated exit codes:
.Bl -tag -with indent
.It Er EOK=0
Command completed successfully.
.It Er ESIGNAL=1
Interrupted by signal.
.It Er EFAIL=2
Generic application logic error.
.It Er EPARAM=3
Invalid or conflicting arguments were supplied.
.It Er ENODEVICE=4
No or inaccessible devices selected.
.It Er EDESTDIR=5
The
.Ar destdir
is not a directory.
.It Er ENOKERNEL=6
Cannot access kernel in
.Ar destdir .
.It Er EEFILABEL=7
Corrupt label formatting, see
.Ar efilabel
in the
.Sx Arguments
section.
.It Er ESCHEME=8
None or unsupported partitioning scheme detected in device.
.It Er ENOPARTS=9
Neither a
.Nm freebsd-boot
nor an
.Nm EFI
boot partition was found on a selected device.
.It Er EEFIBOOTMGR=10
Failed to run
.Xr efibootmgr 8 .
.It Er ELOADER=11
Cannot read a required loader image.
.It Er EMOUNT=12
Failed to mount the
.Nm EFI
boot partition.
.It Er ECMD=13
Failed to execute a command during the update procedure.
.It Er EEFIFILE=13
Invalid or conflicting
.Nm EFI
file destinations.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Run
.Xr gpart 8
for a list of devices:
.Dl gpart show
.Pp
Inspect the boot environment and the desired device:
.Dl loaderupdate -P nvd0
.Pp
Review the commands to execute:
.Dl loaderupdate -D nvd0
.Pp
Finally update the loaders for the device:
.Dl loaderupdate nvd0
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr bprintf 1 ,
.Xr efibootmgr 8 ,
.Xr gpart 8 ,
.Xr gptboot 8 ,
.Xr gptzfsboot 8 ,
.Xr loader 8 ,
.Xr uefi 8
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
command was added with the
.Sy bsda2-0.4.0
release.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Dominic Fandrey Aq Mt freebsd@k4m1.org
.Sh CAVEATS
Only supports GUID Partition Table formatted devices.
