.Dd 29 July, 2024
.Dt PKG_LIBCHK 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg_libchk
.Nd check packages for links against missing libraries
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl cmnoqv
.Op Fl j Ar jobs
.Op Fl a
.Nm
.Op Fl CcdgimnOoqrvx
.Op Fl j Ar jobs
.Ar pkg-name ...
.Nm
.Fl h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
script uses
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr ldd 1
and
.Xr readelf 1
to check whether a package is linked against missing libraries or
using compatibility libraries
.Pq matching Pa */lib*/compat/* .
.Ss Arguments
The following arguments are accepted:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ar jobs
The number of parallel process to perform library checks.
The default is number of detected cores plus one.
.It Ar pkg-name
Packages are package names or shell glob patterns matching these. Whatever
works with
.Xr pkg-info 8
is an acceptable package.
.El
.Ss Options
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl a , -all
Check all packages. This is the default action in case no
.Ar pkg-name
has been specified.
.It Fl C , -case-sensitive
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.It Fl c , -clean
Create clean output without status messages.
.It Fl d , -dependencies
Also operate on the dependencies of the provided
.Ar pkg-name .
.It Fl g , -glob
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.It Fl h , -help
Displays the available options.
.It Fl i , -case-insensitive
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.It Fl j Ar jobs , Fl -jobs Ar jobs
Set the number of parallel processes to perform library checks.
.It Fl m , -no-filter
In this mode all the checks to detect false positives produced by
.Xr ldd 1
are deactivated.
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Indirect dependencies are no longer recognised as such.
.It
Dependencies that are part of a package even though
.Xr ldd 1
does not find them are no longer discarded - finding these dependencies
usually just requires some runtime information ldd is not privy to.
.It
Dependencies of unbranded
.Xr elf 3
binaries are no longer distinguished from dependencies of native binaries.
.El
.It Fl n , -no-compat
This deactivates detecting compatibility libraries.
.It Fl O , -by-origin
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.It Fl o , -origin
Instead of the package name and version the package origin and flavour
is printed.
.It Fl q , -quiet
Only print the names of affected packages. Do not print any details. This
option is meant for machine readability.
.Pp
This option cannot be combined with verbose output.
.It Fl r , -required-by
Also check packages that depend on the provided
.Ar packages .
This is a good idea when checking for the effects of a library update.
.It Fl v , -verbose
Be verbose about missing dependencies. Instead of rejecting indirect
dependencies print them.
.Pp
This option cannot be combined with quiet output.
.It Fl x , -regex
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
To check all your packages run:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg_libchk
.Ed
.Pp
To create plain output for everything connected to gtk.
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg_libchk -q \\*gtk\\*
.Ed
.Pp
After upgrading a library, in this case icu, you can check all depending
packages:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg_libchk -r icu
.Ed
.Sh EXIT CODES
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It 1
The script has terminated because it received SIGHUP, SIGINT or SIGTERM.
.It 2
An unknown parameter has been supplied.
.It 3
The incompatible parameters
.Fl v
and
.Fl q
have been supplied.
.It 4
The parameter
.Fl j
has been supplied without an acceptable number.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr ldd 1 ,
.Xr readelf 1 ,
.Xr hier 7
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
script first appeared in the
.Sy bsdadminscripts-4.0
collection. It was rewritten
for the
.Sy bsda2
collection.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Dominic Fandrey Aq Mt freebsd@k4m1.org
