.Dd 15 November, 2023
.Dt PKG_VALIDATE 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg_validate
.Nd list mismatched and missing files of installed packages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl cDmoqv
.Op Fl b Ar batchsize
.Op Fl j Ar jobs
.Op Fl a
.Nm
.Op Fl CcdDgimOoqrvx
.Op Fl b Ar batchsize
.Op Fl j Ar jobs
.Ar pkg-name ...
.Nm
.Fl h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm
script provides the same functionality as running
.Ql Cm pkg check Fl s .
It can be run by an unprivileged user and its use of multiple processes
can make it significantly faster when files are cached in memory or
read from a fast solid state drive.
.Ss Arguments
The following arguments are accepted:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ar batchsize
The number of files to verify in a single chunk. This controls the
granularity of parallel job execution, the default is 1024.
.It Ar jobs
The number of parallel processes to perform file validation.
The default is number of detected cores plus one.
.It Ar pkg-name
Packages are package names or shell glob patterns matching these. Whatever
works with
.Xr pkg-info 8
is an acceptable package.
.El
.Ss Options
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl a , -all
Check all packages. This is the default action in case no
.Ar pkg-name
has been specified.
.It Fl b Ar batchsize , Fl -batch Ar batchsize
Set the number of files to verify in a single chunk.
.It Fl C , -case-sensitive
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.It Fl c , -clean
Create clean output without status messages.
.It Fl d , -dependencies
Also operate on the dependencies of the provided
.Ar pkg-name .
.It Fl D , -developer
Produce additional output relevant to
.Xr ports 7 and Xr pkg 8 developers.
.Pp
Currently it provides information about dead symlinks.
.It Fl g , -glob
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.It Fl h , -help
Displays the available options.
.It Fl i , -case-insensitive
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.It Fl j Ar jobs , Fl -jobs Ar jobs
Specify the amount of parallel
.Ar jobs
the script will attempt run.
.It Fl m , -no-filter
In this mode files that cannot be checked due to user permissions
are listed along with checksum mismatches and missing files.
.It Fl O , -by-origin
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.It Fl o , -origin
Instead of the package name the package origin is printed.
.It Fl q , -quiet
Only print the names of affected packages. Do not print any details. This
option is meant for machine readability.
.Pp
This option cannot be combined with verbose output.
.It Fl r , -required-by
Also check packages that depend on the provided
.Ar packages .
This is a good idea when checking for the effects of a library update.
.It Fl v , -verbose
List the selected packages before checking them.
.It Fl x , -regex
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
To check all your packages run:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg_validate
.Ed
.Pp
List files that cannot be checked due to missing user privileges:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg_validate -m
.Ed
.Pp
Produce output suitable as input to other
.Xr pkg 8
tools:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg_validate -q
.Ed
.Pp
For operating
.Xr poudriere 8
or
.Xr portmaster 8
it can be more useful to output package origins instead of names:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg_validate -o
.Ed
.Pp
Flags can be combined:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg_validate -qo
.Ed
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
The following environment variables affect the operation of
.Nm .
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Ev DEVELOPER
Activates additional diagnostics, see the
.Fl -developer
option.
.Pp
Set to
.Dv Sq yes
or
.Dv 1
to enable. This is equivalent to the
.Ev DEVELOPER
macro of
.In bsd.port.mk .
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It 1
The script has terminated because it received SIGHUP, SIGINT or SIGTERM.
.It 2
An unknown parameter has been supplied.
.It 3
The incompatible parameters
.Fl v
and
.Fl q
have been supplied.
.It 4
The parameter
.Fl j
has been supplied without an acceptable number.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg-check 8 ,
.Xr pkg-query 8 ,
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr sha256 1 ,
.Xr readlink 1
.Sh HISTORY
A
.Nm
script first appeared in the
.Sy bsdadminscripts-3.0
collection. It was
deemed obsolete with the inception of
.Sy bsda2
and rewritten for
.Sy bsda2-0.3.0 .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Dominic Fandrey Aq Mt freebsd@k4m1.org
