.Dd 14 November, 2023
.Dt PKG_VERSION 8
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm pkg_version
.Nd summarise installed versions of packages
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl aCcdghiOoPqrRvx
.Op Fl I Op Ar index
.Op Fl j Ar jobs
.Op Fl l Ar limchar
.Op Fl L Ar limchar
.Op Ar pkg-name ...
.Sh Description
The
.Nm
script is a
.Xr pkg-version 8
wrapper capable of greatly improving the performance of using the
.Xr ports 7
tree as the version source by querying version numbers in parallel.
.Pp
For most of the behaviour
.Xr pkg-version 8
can be consulted. Noteworthy differences are:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Multiple package arguments can be provided
.It
Origins
.Po if
.Fl o
is used
.Pc
contain the flavour of the installed package
.It
If
.Fl l
.Ar limchar
and
.Fl q
are given, only package identifiers are output
.It
The
.Fl t
and
.Fl T
arguments are not supported
.El
.Ss ARGUMENTS
The following arguments are accepted:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It index
The index file to compare installed package versions to. Defaults to
.Pa /usr/ports/INDEX-N
with N being the major
.Fx
version number. See
.Xr pkg-version 8 .
.It Ar jobs
The number of processes to use in parallel to run
.Xr pkg-version 8
queries.
.It Ar limchar
A single character constraining which packages are output.
.It Ar pkg-name
Packages are package names or shell glob patterns matching these. Whatever
works with
.Xr pkg-info 8
is an acceptable package.
.El
.Ss OPTIONS
The following options are available:
.Bl -tag -width indent
.It Fl a , -all
Check all packages. This is the default action in case no
.Ar pkg-name
has been specified.
.It Fl C , -case-sensitive
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.It Fl c , -clean
Create clean output without status messages.
.It Fl d , -dependencies
Also operate on the dependencies of the provided
.Ar pkg-name .
.It Fl g , -glob
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.It Fl h , -help
Displays the available options.
.It Fl i , -case-insensitive
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.It Fl I Oo Ar index Oc , Fl -index Op Ar index
Use index file to determine if a package is out of date. See
.Xr pkg-version 8 .
.It Fl j Ar jobs , Fl -jobs Ar jobs
Specify the amount of parallel
.Ar jobs
the script will attempt run. The default is number of detected cores.
.It Fl l Ar limchar , Fl --like Ar limchar
Display only packages with the given version status, see
.Xr pkg-version 8 .
.It Fl L Ar limchar , Fl --not-like Ar limchar
Display only packages unlike the given version status, see
.Xr pkg-version 8 .
.It Fl O , -by-origin
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.It Fl o , -origin
Instead of the package name and version the package origin and flavour
is printed.
.It Fl P , -ports
Use
.Xr ports 7
to determine if a package is out of date. See
.Xr pkg-version 8 .
.It Fl q , -quiet
Produce less output, see
.Xr pkg-version 8 .
.It Fl R , -remote
Use repository catalogue to determine if a package is out of date.
See
.Xr pkg-version 8 .
.It Fl r , -required-by
Also check packages that depend on the provided packages.
.It Fl U , -no-repo-update
Disable automatic update of the repository catalogue. See
.Xr pkg-version 8 .
.It Fl v , -verbose
Be verbose, see
.Xr pkg-version 8 .
Use twice to be extra verbose.
.It Fl x , -regex
See
.Xr pkg-info 8 .
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
Check all packages whether they are out of date:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg_version
.Ed
.Pp
List all out of date GPU firmware packages, without any visual clutter:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
pkg_version -ql\\< gpu-firmware-\\*
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr pkg-info 8 ,
.Xr pkg-version 8 ,
.Xr ports 7
.Sh HISTORY
The
.Nm
script first appeared in the
.Sy bsda2-0.5.0
collection.
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Dominic Fandrey Aq Mt freebsd@k4m1.org
